Transcript: App Recording 20251213 2022_writing_1.mp3
Generated: 2025-12-13 20:46:35
Duration: 11:07
============================================================

[00:00] Speaker 1:
If you talk to a fan of Disco Elysium about what makes this game special, chances are they'll quickly bring up the writing. Disco is a game with writing at its core. When combat was stripped out of the gameplay early in pre-production, it put even more pressure on the writing to not only be enjoyable to read, but to drive the gameplay forward. The skill system, world building, audio interface and art would all have to support this central pillar of the experience. Disco Elysium has eight credited writers, and in this episode we're going to explore the work of each of those people. In our previous episodes you've already met Robert, Helen, Argo and Martin, and in today's episode we're going to introduce you to Olga Moskvina, along with the work of Justin Keenan, Kashtaker and Martin Ljubljana before he left the project. Crediting Who with What is a particularly challenging effort given the collaborative nature of the project, but it does allow us to explore some important production processes that the studio developed. Not just how they collaborated as a team, but the critical work of editing, where writers would both clean up and modify the work of others in an effort to add flavour and consistency to scenes and characters. Later we're going to explore many of the characters you know and love, alongside essential world building like The Pale, how Harry and Kim evolved during development and much more. We've tried to keep this series as spoiler free as possible, but there's no getting around it in this one. I'll also be honest and say that this episode relies on you having played the game more than the others, as we're diving deep into the creative backstories of the game's many rich and complex characters. In any case, first we begin at the start of production, with a writing team attempting to come to grips with the universe of Elysium from both a narrative perspective and the tools they used as developers. The writers team was like, I was most connected, and that was who I was most working with after the programmers, after getting the original kind of design structures for the dialogue upwards, which me and Derv did together. We got this pipeline from articy to the dialogue engine down, and we kind of developed the what rules, like a passive skill can never speak before a normal skill, normal character needs to speak before it always comments on things. And then after that, we needed more writers on the team, so we just started looking for them. When we were all working from Tallinn, so in the writers room we had me, Arkadouliq, Olga Muskvina, then we also had Mert and Rattasip, who has now done work on Pentiument. The whole test character was literally to me and Helen and Argo was just come up with something new and write an interesting scene, a new additional character to the game. And I wrote Tommy, yeah, like a lorry driver, who had like a hidden, you know, like a pleasant side because every other lorry driver at the time was a huge jerk. Argo, because we'd written so much together and we played so much together and he knew the world, Argo was the writer I could use to pass the baton over in the main story if it was kind of slightly peripheral to the main story. So for example, he wrote Titus and I wrote Claus, yeah, it did gain a lot from having an external voice there too, because Argo has this, he brought this Steinbeck-like quality to Titus. So that's one example of this kind of tennis playing dynamic in writing. And then Olga Muskvina came on board, who is, Olga is a Russian-American writer. She's a Russian person who speaks with a Californian accent, Russians who like Californian accent. And she wrote Lena and... ...familiar with this demographic. And also I very quickly learned this lesson writing Lena and...

[04:00] Speaker 2:
...instruction, what's a boule and what's a white check, what's a red check, which... And Argo just came up with something new and write an interesting scene, a new additional character to the game, and yeah, and I wrote Tommy. Argo has this, he brought this Steinbeck-like...

[04:21] Speaker 1:
And she wrote Lena and Morel and cryptozoologists on the coast, Roy, Perseus Roy. An important part of the main quest, she wrote Ruby. I think her biggest or even bigger contribution than this perhaps is that she was the primary language editor on the entire thing. Olga is a poetess and she has incredible language and she's kind of responsible for the final scene of language quality on Disco Elysium. I was on leave from Princeton. I had a friend, Quintus Andreessen, who contributed some ideas and thoughts to Disco Elysium as well. And they really wanted somebody who was an English speaker who would be able to support their writing. And they wanted Quintus at first, but he wasn't available to move to Estonia. I was, and I thought I'd only do it for a few months to fix a few things after their initial demo. Cash was a writer we got in the last year to do a lot of structural editing. Cash is a structural genius. He can really keep things in mind like the Orch, Soul, Mystery, and the game had a lot of structural programming which is just mind-bendingly difficult. And he filled in some of the missing parts and some of the warp dialogues on the coast and did a lot of game design for putting containers on the map. And this final part of the game came together with his help. Training period, teaching period for a new disco writer, it takes about between four to six months to actually get from, okay, you start learning the tools, the methodology, and now you're more or less able to write independently. The first month we mostly just did like lore lectures. Robert Roberts was giving like a big Elysium lore dumps. It was like going to the university but in a pun way. I do get a little bit like, ugh, about some of the vibes people try to present at some about everybody just being like punks who never finished college because so many of us were actually like fucking teachers in college. Like I taught college writing for six years. Martin has a semiotic semi from Tartu University which is the best university in Estonia. Irv was a professor as well, wasn't he, in Tallinn University? Yeah, yeah. Yeah, he's one of my favorite people in the world.

[07:01] Speaker 2:
So we actually had a lot of academics. So the person who wrote Fuck the World, Cosmos, was the producer and he's like also a famous poet in Estonia. For example, Sim Siname Cosmos, a producer on the project, is also a really cool funny writer and then he wrote Piss Flopare as we called him and Fuck the World and I think the Mega Rich Lightbending guy was also his draft. And then we had a writer called Märtin Ratasepp who took a lot of work from Martin Luiga who sadly had to leave the project after about a year. So he took a lot of work over from Martin and did second drafts of Net Picker and Kolmima Jana. My favorite Märtin character which has most of his tone in it is Tommy Lom. It has like when...

[08:07] Speaker 1:
I think every writer knows that like if you are staring at a blank word document nothing comes out. You're just like I don't know today is not the day like I'm...

[08:20] Speaker 2:
Log with like everything that we needed to know. Artistic draft. Like little dialogue.

[08:30] Speaker 1:
Leave the project after Net Picker and Kolmima Jana. My favorite Märtin character Lom.

[08:40] Speaker 2:
Of like... Artistic draft. Which I really liked. Yeah.

[08:52] Speaker 1:
So at the time the studio was using Artistic draft 2. Yeah it's one of those node-based like visual programming tools with a lot of like little dialogue fragments that you just link up and you can put your little global variables or like Booleans to create interesting structures you know that with the little switches that build reactivity. The onboarding was basically I think we sat in the main room of the office and Robert just basically showed on a big screen which opened Artistic and just like demonstrated how to build the dialogue structure of an NPC that you are encountering like you know the whole greeting part and how to get to the hub and how the hub works and you know what's a fragment, what's a conditional, what's an instruction, what's a Boolean, right? What's a white check, what's a red check which those had already been designed at the time. What's a passive with you know the skills talking to like how to set everything up. Basically over the course of maybe like a couple of hours just like wrote an example dialogue with like everything that we needed to know. Artistic draft had like such a huge part of the way of influencing the way the entire game is written because I think every writer knows that like if you are staring at a blank word document nothing comes out you're just like I don't know today is not today like I'm not writing anything. It's not the same when you're writing an Artistic because you are creating those like dialogue boxes with like short sentences and it is so much fun like just creating more and more and more and more. So I think every one of the writers that we had on the team previously had a problem of not writing enough and then for the first time ever the problem became that we were writing too much. Like there wasn't enough time to edit it to go over it we were like I have to cut it too much. Like there wasn't enough time to edit it to go over it we were like I have to cut some parts we were like but then like everything was written was so good that you were like oh we we're gonna just have to find the time and that was all because of Artistic.
